---
title: "Linear Momentum and Force"
layout: page
---


<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
* Define linear momentum.
* Explain the relationship between momentum and force.
* State Newton’s second law of motion in terms of momentum.
* Calculate momentum given mass and velocity.

</div>

### Linear Momentum

The scientific definition of linear momentum is consistent with most people’s
intuitive understanding of momentum: a large, fast-moving object has greater
momentum than a smaller, slower object. **Linear momentum**{: data-type="term" #import-auto-id1343909} is defined as the product of a system’s mass multiplied by its velocity. In symbols, linear

momentum is expressed as

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-927">
 $$ \mathbf{p}=m\mathbf{\text{v}}. $$ 
</div>

Momentum is directly proportional to the object’s mass and also its velocity.
Thus the greater an object’s mass or the greater its velocity, the greater its
momentum. Momentum $$ \mathbf{p} $$
is a vector having the same direction as the velocity $$ \mathbf{\text{v}} $$. The SI unit for momentum is $$ \text{kg}·\text{m/s} $$.

<div data-type="note" data-has-label="true" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Linear Momentum
</div>
Linear momentum is defined as the product of a system’s mass multiplied by its velocity:

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-695">
 $$ \mathbf{p}=m\mathbf{\text{v}}. $$ 
</div>
</div>

<div data-type="example" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Calculating Momentum: A Football Player and a Football
</div>
(a) Calculate the momentum of a 110-kg football player running at 8.00 m/s. (b) Compare the player’s momentum with the momentum of a hard-thrown 0.410-kg football that has a speed of 25.0 m/s.

**Strategy**

No information is given regarding direction, and so we can calculate only the
magnitude of the momentum, $$ p $$. (As usual, a symbol that is in italics is a magnitude, whereas one that is
italicized, boldfaced, and has an arrow is a vector.) In both parts of this
example, the magnitude of momentum can be calculated directly from the
definition of momentum given in the equation, which becomes

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-605">
 $$ p=\text{mv} $$ 
</div>
when only magnitudes are considered.

**Solution for (a)**

To determine the momentum of the player, substitute the known values for the
player’s mass and speed into the equation.

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-926">
 $$ {p}_{\text{player}}=\left(\text{110 kg}\right)\left(8\text{.}\text{00 m/s}\right)=\text{880 kg}·\text{m/s} $$ 
</div>
**Solution for (b)**

To determine the momentum of the ball, substitute the known values for the
ball’s mass and speed into the equation.

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-722">
 $$ {p}_{\text{ball}}=\left(\text{0.410 kg}\right)\left(\text{25.0 m/s}\right)=\text{10.3 kg}·\text{m/s} $$ 
</div>
The ratio of the player’s momentum to that of the ball is

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-45">
 $$ \frac{ p_{\text{player}}}{ p_{\text{ball}}}=\frac{\text{880}}{\text{10}\text{.}3}=\text{85}\text{.}9. $$ 
</div>
**Discussion**

Although the ball has greater velocity, the player has a much greater mass. Thus
the momentum of the player is much greater than the momentum of the football, as
you might guess. As a result, the player’s motion is only slightly affected if
he catches the ball. We shall quantify what happens in such collisions in terms
of momentum in later sections.

</div>

### Momentum and Newton’s Second Law

The importance of momentum, unlike the importance of energy, was recognized
early in the development of classical physics. Momentum was deemed so important
that it was called the “quantity of motion.” Newton actually stated his **second law of motion**{: data-type="term" #import-auto-id1513532} in terms of
momentum: The net external force equals the change in momentum of a system
divided by the time over which it changes. Using symbols, this law is

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-96">
 $$ {\mathbf{F}}_{\text{net}}=\frac{\Delta \mathbf{p}}{\Delta t}, $$ 
</div>

where $$ {\mathbf{F}}_{\text{net}} $$
is the net external force, $$ \Delta \mathbf{p} $$
is the change in momentum, and $$ \Delta t $$
is the change in time.

<div data-type="note" data-has-label="true" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Newton’s Second Law of Motion in Terms of Momentum
</div>
The net external force equals the change in momentum of a system divided by the time over which it changes.

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-763">
 $$ {\mathbf{F}}_{\text{net}}=\frac{\Delta \mathbf{p}}{\Delta t} $$ 
</div>
</div>

<div data-type="note" data-has-label="true" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Making Connections: Force and Momentum
</div>
Force and momentum are intimately related. Force acting over time can change momentum, and Newton’s second law of motion, can be stated in its most broadly applicable form in terms of momentum. Momentum continues to be a key concept in the study of atomic and subatomic particles in quantum mechanics.

</div>

This statement of Newton’s second law of motion includes the more familiar $$
{\mathbf{F}}_
{\text{net}}=m\mathbf{a} $$
as a special case. We can derive this form as follows. First, note that the
change in momentum $$ \Delta \mathbf{p} $$
is given by

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-210">
 $$ \Delta \mathbf{p}=\Delta \left(m\mathbf{v}\right). $$ 
</div>

If the mass of the system is constant, then

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-316">
 $$ \Delta \left(m\mathbf{v}\right)=m\Delta \mathbf{v}. $$ 
</div>

So that for constant mass, Newton’s second law of motion becomes

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-844">
 $$ {\mathbf{F}}_{\text{net}}=\frac{\Delta \mathbf{p}}{\Delta t}=\frac{m\Delta \mathbf{v}}{\Delta t}\text{.} $$ 
</div>

Because $$ \frac{\Delta \mathbf{v}}{\Delta t}=\mathbf{a} $$, we get the familiar equation

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-17">
 $$ {\mathbf{F}}_{\text{net}}=m\mathbf{a} $$ 
</div>

*when the mass of the system is constant*.

Newton’s second law of motion stated in terms of momentum is more generally
applicable because it can be applied to systems where the mass is changing, such
as rockets, as well as to systems of constant mass. We will consider systems
with varying mass in some detail**;** however, the relationship between momentum
and force remains useful when mass is constant, such as in the following
example.

<div data-type="example" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Calculating Force: Venus Williams’ Racquet
</div>
During the 2007 French Open, Venus Williams hit the fastest recorded serve in a premier women’s match, reaching a speed of 58 m/s (209 km/h). What is the average force exerted on the 0.057-kg tennis ball by Venus Williams’ racquet, assuming that the ball’s speed just after impact is 58 m/s, that the initial horizontal component of the velocity before impact is negligible, and that the ball remained in contact with the racquet for 5.0 ms (milliseconds)?

**Strategy**

This problem involves only one dimension because the ball starts from having no
horizontal velocity component before impact. Newton’s second law stated in terms
of momentum is then written as

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-344">
 $$ {\mathbf{F}}_{\text{net}}=\frac{\Delta \mathbf{p}}{\Delta t}\text{.} $$ 
</div>
As noted above, when mass is constant, the change in momentum is given by

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-440">
 $$ \Delta p=m\Delta v=m\left({v}_{f}-{v}_{i}\right). $$ 
</div>
In this example, the velocity just after impact and the change in time are given; thus, once  $$ \Delta p $$ 

is calculated, $$ {F}_{\text{net}}=\frac{\Delta p}{\Delta t} $$
can be used to find the force.

**Solution**

To determine the change in momentum, substitute the values for the initial and
final velocities into the equation above.

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-107">
 $$ \begin{array}{lll}\Delta p& =& m\left({v}_{f}–{v}_{i}\right)\\ & =& \left(\text{0.057 kg}\right)\left(\text{58 m/s}–0 m/s\right)\\ & =& 3\text{.306 kg}·\text{m/s}\approx \text{3.3 kg}·\text{m/s}\end{array} $$ 
</div>
Now the magnitude of the net external force can determined by using  $$ {F}_{\text{net}}=\frac{\Delta p}{\Delta t} $$ 

\:

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-211">
 $$ \begin{array}{lll}{F}_{\text{net}}& =& \frac{\Delta p}{\Delta t}=\frac{\text{3.306 kg}\cdot \text{m/s}}{5\text{.}0×{\text{10}}^{-3}s}\\ & =& \text{661 N}\approx \text{660 N,}\end{array} $$ 
</div>
where we have retained only two significant figures in the final step.

**Discussion**

This quantity was the average force exerted by Venus Williams’ racquet on the
tennis ball during its brief impact (note that the ball also experienced the
0.56-N force of gravity, but that force was not due to the racquet). This
problem could also be solved by first finding the acceleration and then using
$$ {F}_
{\text{net}}=\text{ma}
$$, but one additional step would be required compared with the strategy used in
this example.

</div>

### Section Summary

* {: #import-auto-id1499434} Linear momentum (**momentum** for brevity) is
  defined as the product of a system’s mass multiplied by its velocity.
* {: #import-auto-id1489206} In symbols, linear momentum $$ \mathbf{p} $$
  is defined to be
  <div data-type="equation" id="eip-123">
   $$ \mathbf{p}=m\mathbf{v}, $$ 
  </div>

  where * $$ m $$
    * is the mass of the system and $$ \mathbf{v} $$
  is its velocity.
* {: #import-auto-id1512300} The SI unit for momentum is $$
  \text{kg}·\text{m/s} $$
  .
* {: #import-auto-id1498973} Newton’s second law of motion in terms of momentum
  states that the net external force equals the change in momentum of a system
  divided by the time over which it changes.
* {: #import-auto-id1498977} In symbols, Newton’s second law of motion is
  defined to be
  <div data-type="equation" id="eip-370">
   $$ {\mathbf{F}}_{\text{net}}=\frac{\Delta \mathbf{p}}{\Delta t}\text{,} $$ 
  </div>

  $$ {\mathbf{F}}_{\text{net}} $$
  is the net external force, $$ \Delta \mathbf{p} $$
  is the change in momentum, and $$ \Delta t $$
  is the change time.

### Conceptual Questions

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
An object that has a small mass and an object that has a large mass have the same momentum. Which object has the largest kinetic energy?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
An object that has a small mass and an object that has a large mass have the same kinetic energy. Which mass has the largest momentum?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
**Professional Application**

Football coaches advise players to block, hit, and tackle with their feet on the
ground rather than by leaping through the air. Using the concepts of momentum,
work, and energy, explain how a football player can be more effective with his
feet on the ground.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
How can a small force impart the same momentum to an object as a large force?

</div>
</div>

### Problems &amp; Exercises

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
(a) Calculate the momentum of a 2000-kg elephant charging a hunter at a speed of  $$ 7\text{.}\text{50 m/s} $$ 

. (b) Compare the elephant’s momentum with the momentum of a 0.0400-kg
tranquilizer dart fired at a speed of $$
\text{600 m/s} $$. (c) What is the momentum of the 90.0-kg hunter running at $$
7\text{.}\text{40 m/s} $$
after missing the elephant?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
(a)  $$ \text{1.50}×{\text{10}}^{4}\text{kg}\cdot \text{m/s} $$ 

(b) 625 to 1

(c)  $$
6\text{.}\text{66}×{\text{10}}^{2}\text{kg}\cdot
\text{m/s} $$
</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
(a) What is the mass of a large ship that has a momentum of  $$ 1\text{.}\text{60}×{\text{10}}^{9}\text{kg}·\text{m/s} $$ 

, when the ship is moving at a speed of $$ \text{48.0 km/h?} $$
(b) Compare the ship’s momentum to the momentum of a 1100-kg artillery shell
fired at a speed of $$ \text{1200 m/s} $$.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
(a) At what speed would a  $$ 2\text{.}\text{00}×{\text{10}}^{4}\text{-kg} $$ 

airplane have to fly to have a momentum of $$
1\text{.}\text{60}×{\text{10}}^{9}\text{kg}·\text{m/s}
$$
(the same as the ship’s momentum in the problem above)? (b) What is the plane’s
momentum when it is taking off at a speed of $$ \text{60.0 m/s} $$
? (c) If the ship is an aircraft carrier that launches these airplanes with a
catapult, discuss the implications of your answer to (b) as it relates to recoil
effects of the catapult on the ship.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
(a)  $$ 8\text{.}\text{00}×{\text{10}}^{4}\text{m/s} $$ 

(b)  $$
1\text{.}\text{20}×{\text{10}}^{6}\text{kg}·\text{m/s}
$$
(c) Because the momentum of the airplane is 3 orders of magnitude smaller than
of the ship, the ship will not recoil very much. The recoil would be $$
-0\text{.}\text{0100 m/s} $$, which is probably not noticeable.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
(a) What is the momentum of a garbage truck that is  $$ 1\text{.}\text{20}×{\text{10}}^{4}\text{kg} $$ 

and is moving at $$ 10\text{.}\text{0 m/s} $$
? (b) At what speed would an 8.00-kg trash can have the same momentum as the
truck?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
A runaway train car that has a mass of 15,000 kg travels at a speed of  $$ 5\text{.4 m/s} $$ 

down a track. Compute the time required for a force of 1500 N to bring the car
to rest.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" markdown="1">
54 s

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
The mass of Earth is  $$ 5\text{.}\text{972}×{10}^{\text{24}}\text{kg} $$ 

and its orbital radius is an average of $$
1\text{.}\text{496}×{10}^{\text{11}}\text{m} $$. Calculate its linear momentum.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="glossary" markdown="1">
### Glossary
{: data-type="glossary-title"}

linear momentum
: the product of mass and velocity {: #import-auto-id1499242}

second law of motion
: physical law that states that the net external force equals the change in
momentum of a system divided by the time over which it changes {: #import-auto-id1499250}

</div>

