---
title: "The Second Condition for Equilibrium"
layout: page
---


<div data-type="abstract" markdown="1">
* State the second condition that is necessary to achieve equilibrium.
* Explain torque and the factors on which it depends.
* Describe the role of torque in rotational mechanics.

</div>

<div data-type="note" data-has-label="true" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Torque
</div>
The second condition necessary to achieve equilibrium involves avoiding accelerated rotation (maintaining a constant angular velocity). A rotating body or system can be in equilibrium if its rate of rotation is constant and remains unchanged by the forces acting on it. To understand what factors affect rotation, let us think about what happens when you open an ordinary door by rotating it on its hinges.

</div>

Several familiar factors determine how effective you are in opening the door.
See [\[link\]](#import-auto-id3533620). First of all, the larger the force, the
more effective it is in opening the door—obviously, the harder you push, the
more rapidly the door opens. Also, the point at which you push is crucial. If
you apply your force too close to the hinges, the door will open slowly, if at
all. Most people have been embarrassed by making this mistake and bumping up
against a door when it did not open as quickly as expected. Finally, the
direction in which you push is also important. The most effective direction is
perpendicular to the door—we push in this direction almost instinctively.

![In the figure, six top views of a door are shown. In the first figure, a force vector is shown in the North West direction. The perpendicular distance of the force from the point of rotation is r. In the second figure, a force is applied in the opposite direction at the same distance from the hinges. In the third figure, a smaller force in applied at the same point. In the next figure, a horizontal force is applied at the same point. In this case, the perpendicular distance from the hinges is shown as r sin theta. In the next figure, force is applied at a distance near the hinges. In the final figure, the force is shown along the direction of hinges toward the handle of the door.](../resources/Figure_10_02_01a.jpg "Torque is the turning or twisting effectiveness of a force, illustrated here for door rotation on its hinges (as viewed from overhead). Torque has both magnitude and direction. (a) Counterclockwise torque is produced by this force, which means that the door will rotate in a counterclockwise due to  \( F \) . Note that r&#x22A5; size 12{r} sub{} is the perpendicular distance of the pivot from the line of action of the force. (b) A smaller counterclockwise torque is produced by a smaller force F&#x2032; size 12{F} {} acting at the same distance from the hinges (the pivot point). (c) The same force as in (a) produces a smaller counterclockwise torque when applied at a smaller distance from the hinges. (d) The same force as in (a), but acting in the opposite direction, produces a clockwise torque. (e) A smaller counterclockwise torque is produced by the same magnitude force acting at the same point but in a different direction. Here,  \( \theta \)  is less than 90&#xBA;. (f) Torque is zero here since the force just pulls on the hinges, producing no rotation. In this case, &#x3B8;=0&#xBA; size 12{&#x3B8;=0&#xB0;} {}.")
{: #import-auto-id3533620}

The magnitude, direction, and point of application of the force are incorporated
into the definition of the physical quantity called torque. **Torque**{:
data-type="term" #import-auto-id2603151} is the rotational equivalent of a
force. It is a measure of the effectiveness of a force in changing or
accelerating a rotation (changing the angular velocity over a period of time).
In equation form, the magnitude of torque is defined to be

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-645">
 $$ \tau =rF\sin{\theta}  $$ 
</div>

where $$ \tau $$
(the Greek letter tau) is the symbol for torque, $$ r $$ is the distance from
the pivot point to the point where the force is applied, $$ F $$ is the
magnitude of the force, and $$ \theta $$ is the angle between the force and the
vector directed from the point of application to the pivot point, as seen
in [\[link\]](#import-auto-id3533620)
and [\[link\]](#import-auto-id2573920). An alternative expression for torque is
given in terms of the **perpendicular lever arm**{: data-type="term"
#import-auto-id2704160} $$ r_{\perp } $$ as shown
in [\[link\]](#import-auto-id3533620)
and [\[link\]](#import-auto-id2573920), which is defined as

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-505">
 $$ r_{\perp }=r\sin{\theta}  $$ 
</div>

so that

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-139">
 $$ \tau =r_{\perp }F. $$ 
</div>

![In the first part of the figure, a hockey stick is shown. At a point A near the bottom, a nail is fixed. A force is applied at a point near the holding grip of the hockey stick. A quarter circular arrow shows that the stick rotates in the counterclockwise direction. The perpendicular distance between the pivot point and the force vector direction is labeled as r-perpendicular, and the angle between the direction of force and the line joining the pivot A to the point of application of force is given as theta. In the second part of the figure, the pivot point is near the top of the stick and the point of application of the force is about the same as that in the first part of the figure. An upward quarter circle arrow shows that the stick rotates in the clockwise direction.](../resources/Figure_10_02_02abc.jpg "A force applied to an object can produce a torque, which depends on the location of the pivot point. (a) The three factors r, F, and  \( \theta \)  for pivot point A on a body are shown here&#x2014;r is the distance from the chosen pivot point to the point where the force F is applied, and &#x3B8; is the angle between F and the vector directed from the point of application to the pivot point. If the object can rotate around point A, it will rotate counterclockwise. This means that torque is counterclockwise relative to pivot A. (b) In this case, point B is the pivot point. The torque from the applied force will cause a clockwise rotation around point B, and so it is a clockwise torque relative to B.&#10;      ")
{: #import-auto-id2573920}

The perpendicular lever arm $$ r_{\perp } $$ is the shortest distance from the
pivot point to the line along which $$ \mathbf{\text{F}} $$ acts; it is shown as
a dashed line in [\[link\]](#import-auto-id3533620)
and [\[link\]](#import-auto-id2573920). Note that the line segment that defines
the distance $$ r_{\perp } $$ is perpendicular to $$ \mathbf{\text{F}} $$, as
its name implies. It is sometimes easier to find or visualize $$ r_{\perp } $$
than to find both $$ r $$ and $$ \theta $$. In such cases, it may be more
convenient to use $$ \tau =r_{\perp }F $$ rather than $$ \tau =rF\sin{\theta} $$ for torque, but both are equally
valid.

The **SI unit of torque**{: data-type="term" #import-auto-id3062833} is newtons
times meters, usually written as $$ \text{N}·\text{m} $$. For example, if you
push perpendicular to the door with a force of 40 N at a distance of 0.800 m
from the hinges, you exert a torque of $$ 32 \text{N·m} (0.800 \text{m} · 40
\text{N} \sin{90^\circ} ) $$ relative to the hinges. If you reduce the force to
20 N, the torque is reduced to $$ 16 \text{N·m} $$, and so on.

The torque is always calculated with reference to some chosen pivot point. For
the same applied force, a different choice for the location of the pivot will
give you a different value for the torque, since both $$ r $$ and $$ \theta $$
depend on the location of the pivot. Any point in any object can be chosen to
calculate the torque about that point. The object may not actually pivot about
the chosen “pivot point.”

Note that for rotation in a plane, torque has two possible directions. Torque is
either clockwise or counterclockwise relative to the chosen pivot point, as
illustrated for points B and A, respectively,
in [\[link\]](#import-auto-id2573920). If the object can rotate about point A,
it will rotate counterclockwise, which means that the torque for the force is
shown as counterclockwise relative to A. But if the object can rotate about
point B, it will rotate clockwise, which means the torque for the force shown is
clockwise relative to B. Also, the magnitude of the torque is greater when the
lever arm is longer.

Now, *the second condition necessary to achieve equilibrium* is that *the net
external torque on a system must be zero*. An external torque is one that is
created by an external force. You can choose the point around which the torque
is calculated. The point can be the physical pivot point of a system or any
other point in space—but it must be the same point for all torques. If the
second condition (net external torque on a system is zero) is satisfied for one
choice of pivot point, it will also hold true for any other choice of pivot
point in or out of the system of interest. (This is true only in an inertial
frame of reference.) The second condition necessary to achieve equilibrium is
stated in equation form as

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-143">
 $$ \text{net}\tau =0 $$ 
</div>

where net means total. Torques, which are in opposite directions are assigned
opposite signs. A common convention is to call counterclockwise (ccw) torques
positive and clockwise (cw) torques negative.

When two children balance a seesaw as shown
in [\[link\]](#import-auto-id3083545), they satisfy the two conditions for
equilibrium. Most people have perfect intuition about seesaws, knowing that the
lighter child must sit farther from the pivot and that a heavier child can keep
a lighter one off the ground indefinitely.

![Two children are sitting on a seesaw. On the left side, a lighter child is sitting and on the right, a heavier one. The distance of the lighter child from the fulcrum is more than that of heavier child. At the fulcrum, an upward force vector labeled as F-p is shown. The weights of the two children, w-one and w-two, are shown as vectors in the downward direction, and the force at the fulcrum, F-p, is shown as a vector in the upward direction.](../resources/Figure_10_02_03a.jpg "Two children balancing a seesaw satisfy both conditions for equilibrium. The lighter child sits farther from the pivot to create a torque equal in magnitude to that of the heavier child.")
{: #import-auto-id3083545}

<div data-type="example" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
She Saw Torques On A Seesaw
</div>
The two children shown in [\[link\]](#import-auto-id3083545) are balanced on a seesaw of negligible mass. (This assumption is made to keep the example simple—more involved examples will follow.) The first child has a mass of 26.0 kg and sits 1.60 m from the pivot.(a) If the second child has a mass of 32.0 kg, how far is she from the pivot? (b) What is $$ F_{\text{p}} $$ 

, the supporting force exerted by the pivot?

**Strategy**

Both conditions for equilibrium must be satisfied. In part (a), we are asked for
a distance; thus, the second condition (regarding torques) must be used, since
the first (regarding only forces) has no distances in it. To apply the second
condition for equilibrium, we first identify the system of interest to be the
seesaw plus the two children. We take the supporting pivot to be the point about
which the torques are calculated. We then identify all external forces acting on
the system.

**Solution (a)**

The three external forces acting on the system are the weights of the two
children and the supporting force of the pivot. Let us examine the torque
produced by each. Torque is defined to be

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-632">
 $$ \tau =rF\sin{\theta} . $$ 
</div>
Here  $$ \theta =90^\circ $$ 

, so that $$ \sin{\theta} =1 $$ for all three forces. That means $$ r_{\perp }=r
$$ for all three. The torques exerted by the three forces are first,

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-308">
 $$ {\tau }_{1}=r_{1}w_{1} $$ 
</div>
second,

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-488">
 $$ \tau_{2}=–r_{2}w_{2} $$ 
</div>
and third,

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-280">
 $$ \begin{array}{lll}{\tau }_{\text{p}}& =& r_{\text{p}}{F}_{\text{p}}\\ & =& 0\cdot {F}_{\text{p}}\\ & =& 0.
\end{array} $$ 
</div>
Note that a minus sign has been inserted into the second equation because this torque is clockwise and is therefore negative by convention. Since $$ F_{\text{p}} $$ acts directly on the pivot point, the distance $$ r_{\text{p}} $$
is zero. A force acting on the pivot cannot cause a rotation, just as pushing
directly on the hinges of a door will not cause it to rotate. Now, the second
condition for equilibrium is that the sum of the torques on both children is
zero. Therefore

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-443">
 $$ {\tau }_{2}={–\tau }_{1}, $$ 
</div>
or

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-55">
 $$ r_{2}w_{2}=r_{1}w_{1}. $$ 
</div>
Weight is mass times the acceleration due to gravity. Entering  $$ mg  $$ for $$ w $$, we get

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-486">
 $$ r_{2}m_{2}g=r_{1}m_{1}g. $$ 
</div>
Solve this for the unknown  $$ r_{2} $$ 

*\:*

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-573">
 $$ r_{2}=r_{1}\frac{ m_{1}}{ m_{2}}. $$ 
</div>
The quantities on the right side of the equation are known; thus,  $$ r_{2} $$ is

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-42">
 $$ r_{2}=\left(1.60 \text{m}\right)\frac{26.0 \text{kg}}{32.0 \text{kg}}=1.30 \text{m}. $$ 
</div>
As expected, the heavier child must sit closer to the pivot (1.30 m versus 1.60 m) to balance the seesaw.

**Solution (b)**

This part asks for a force $$ F_{\text{p}} $$. The easiest way to find it is to
use the first condition for equilibrium, which is

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-903">
 $$ \text{net}\mathbf{\text{F}}=0. $$ 
</div>
The forces are all vertical, so that we are dealing with a one-dimensional problem along the vertical axis; hence, the condition can be written as

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-156">
 $$ \text{net} F_{y}=0 $$ 
</div>
where we again call the vertical axis the *y*-axis. Choosing upward to be the positive direction, and using plus and minus signs to indicate the directions of the forces, we see that

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-287">
$$ F_{\text{p}}–w_{1}–w_{2}=0. $$ 
</div>
This equation yields what might have been guessed at the beginning:

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-569">
$$ F_{\text{p}}=w_{1}+w_{2}. $$ 
</div>
So, the pivot supplies a supporting force equal to the total weight of the system:

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-660">
$$ F_{\text{p}}=m_{1}g+m_{2}g. $$ 
</div>
Entering known values gives

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-830">
 $$ \begin{array}{lll}{F}_{\text{p}}& =& \left(26.0 \text{kg}\right)\left(9.80\text{m/s}^{2}\right)+\left(32.0 \text{kg}\right)\left(9.80\text{m/s}^{2}\right)\\ & =& 568 \text{N} .
\end{array} $$ 
</div>

**Discussion**

The two results make intuitive sense. The heavier child sits closer to the
pivot. The pivot supports the weight of the two children. Part (b) can also be
solved using the second condition for equilibrium, since both distances are
known, but only if the pivot point is chosen to be somewhere other than the
location of the seesaw’s actual pivot!

</div>

Several aspects of the preceding example have broad implications. First, the
choice of the pivot as the point around which torques are calculated simplified
the problem. Since $$ F_{\text{p}} $$ is exerted on the pivot point, its lever
arm is zero. Hence, the torque exerted by the supporting force $$ F_{\text{p}}
$$ is zero relative to that pivot point. The second condition for equilibrium
holds for any choice of pivot point, and so we choose the pivot point to
simplify the solution of the problem.

Second, the acceleration due to gravity canceled in this problem, and we were
left with a ratio of masses. *This will not always be the case*. Always enter
the correct forces—do not jump ahead to enter some ratio of masses.

Third, the weight of each child is distributed over an area of the seesaw, yet
we treated the weights as if each force were exerted at a single point. This is
not an approximation—the distances $$ r_{1} $$ and $$ r_{2} $$ are the
distances to points directly below the **center of gravity**{: data-type="term"
#import-auto-id2628264} of each child. As we shall see in the next section, the
mass and weight of a system can act as if they are located at a single point.

Finally, note that the concept of torque has an importance beyond static
equilibrium. *Torque plays the same role in rotational motion that force plays
in linear motion.* We will examine this in the next chapter.

<div data-type="note" data-has-label="true" data-label="" markdown="1">
<div data-type="title">
Take-Home Experiment
</div>
Take a piece of modeling clay and put it on a table, then mash a cylinder down into it so that a ruler can balance on the round side of the cylinder while everything remains still. Put a penny 8 cm away from the pivot. Where would you need to put two pennies to balance? Three pennies?

</div>

### Section Summary

* {: #import-auto-id3580915} The second condition assures those torques are also
  balanced. Torque is the rotational equivalent of a force in producing a
  rotation and is defined to be
  <div data-type="equation" id="eip-958">
   $$ \tau =rF\sin{\theta}  $$ 
  </div>

  where $$ \tau $$ is torque, $$ r $$ is the distance from the pivot point to
  the point where the force is applied, $$ F $$ is the magnitude of the force,
  and $$ \theta $$ is the angle between $$ \mathbf{\text{F}} $$ and the vector
  directed from the point where the force acts to the pivot point. The
  perpendicular lever arm $$ r_  {\perp } $$ is defined to be

  <div data-type="equation" id="eip-1000">
   $$ r_{\perp }=r\sin{\theta}  $$ 
  </div>

  so that

  <div data-type="equation" id="eip-196">
   $$ \tau =r_{\perp }F. $$ 
  </div>

* {: #import-auto-id2658945} The perpendicular lever arm $$ r_{\perp } $$ is the
  shortest distance from the pivot point to the line along which $$ F $$ acts.
  The SI unit for torque is newton-meter $$ \text{(N·m)} $$ . The second
  condition necessary to achieve equilibrium is that the net external torque on
  a system must be zero:
  <div data-type="equation" id="eip-28">
   $$ \text{net}\tau =0 $$ 
  </div>

  By convention, counterclockwise torques are positive, and clockwise torques
  are negative.

### Conceptual Questions

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
What three factors affect the torque created by a force relative to a specific pivot point?

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
A wrecking ball is being used to knock down a building. One tall unsupported concrete wall remains standing. If the wrecking ball hits the wall near the top, is the wall more likely to fall over by rotating at its base or by falling straight down? Explain your answer. How is it most likely to fall if it is struck with the same force at its base? Note that this depends on how firmly the wall is attached at its base.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="conceptual-questions">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Mechanics sometimes put a length of pipe over the handle of a wrench when trying to remove a very tight bolt. How does this help? (It is also hazardous since it can break the bolt.)

</div>
</div>

### Problems &amp; Exercises

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problem-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
(a) When opening a door, you push on it perpendicularly with a force of 55.0 N at a distance of 0.850m from the hinges. What torque are you exerting relative to the hinges? (b) Does it matter if you push at the same height as the hinges?

</div>
<div data-type="solution" data-element-type="problem-exercises" markdown="1">
a)  $$ 46.8 \text{ N·m} $$ b) It does not matter at what height you push. The torque depends on only the
magnitude of the force applied and the perpendicular distance of the force’s
application from the hinges. (Children don’t have a tougher time opening a door
because they push lower than adults, they have a tougher time because they don’t
push far enough from the hinges.)

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problem-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
When tightening a bolt, you push perpendicularly on a wrench with a force of 165 N at a distance of 0.140 m from the center of the bolt. (a) How much torque are you exerting in newton × meters (relative to the center of the bolt)? (b) Convert this torque to footpounds.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problem-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Two children push on opposite sides of a door during play. Both push horizontally and perpendicular to the door. One child pushes with a force of 17.5 N at a distance of 0.600 m from the hinges, and the second child pushes at a distance of 0.450 m. What force must the second child exert to keep the door from moving? Assume friction is negligible.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" data-element-type="problem-exercises" markdown="1">
23.3 N

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problem-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Use the second condition for equilibrium  $$ \text{(net τ = 0)} $$ to calculate $$ F_{\text{p}} $$
in [[link]](#fs-id2603151), employing any data given or solved for in part (a)
of the example.

</div>
</div>

<div data-type="exercise" data-element-type="problem-exercises">
<div data-type="problem" markdown="1">
Repeat the seesaw problem in [[link]](#fs-id2603151) with the center of mass of the seesaw 0.160 m to the left of the pivot (on the side of the lighter child) and assuming a mass of 12.0 kg for the seesaw. The other data given in the example remain unchanged. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategy for static equilibrium.

</div>
<div data-type="solution" data-element-type="problem-exercises" markdown="1">
Given:

<div data-type="equation" id="eip-id2115028">
 $$ \begin{array}{ccc}m_{1}& =& 26.0 \text{kg,}
m_{2}=32.0 \text{kg,} 
m_{\text{s}}=12.0 \text{kg,}\\ 
r_{1}& =& 1.60  \text{m,}
r_{\text{s}}=0.160 \text{m}, \text{find (a)}r_{2,}\text{(b)}{F}_{\text{p}}
\end{array} $$ 
</div>
a) Since children are balancing:

<div data-type="equation" id="import-auto-id581634">
 $$ \begin{array}{}\text{net}{\tau }_{\text{cw}}=–\text{net}{\tau }_{\text{ccw}}\\ ⇒w_{1}r_{1}+m_{\text{s}}{gr}_{\text{s}}=w_{2}r_{2}\\ \end{array} $$ 
</div>
So, solving for  $$ r_{2} $$ gives:

<div data-type="equation" id="import-auto-id1402886">
 $$ \begin{array}{lll}r_{2}& =& \frac{ w_{1}r_{1}+m_{\text{s}}{gr}_{\text{s}}}{ w_{2}}=\frac{ m_{1}{gr}_{1}+m_{\text{s}}{gr}_{\text{s}}}{ m_{2}g}=\frac{ m_{1}r_{1}+m_{\text{s}}r_{\text{s}}}{ m_{2}}\\ & =& \frac{\left(26.0 \text{kg}\right)\left(1.60 \text{m}\right)+\left(12.0 \text{kg}\right)\left(0.160 \text{m}\right)}{32.0 \text{kg}}\\ & =& 1.36 \text{m}
\end{array} $$ 
</div>
b) Since the children are not moving:

<div data-type="equation" id="import-auto-id1428249">
 $$ \begin{array}{}\text{net}F=0=F_{\text{p}}–w_{1}–w_{2}–w_{\text{s}}\\ ⇒{F}_{\text{p}}=w_{1}+w_{2}+w_{s}
\end{array} $$ 
</div>
So that

<div data-type="equation" id="import-auto-id1404316">
 $$ \begin{array}{lll}{F}_{\text{p}}& =& \left(26.0 \text{kg}+32.0 \text{kg}+12.0 \text{kg}\right)\left(9.80 \text{m/s}^{2}\right)\\ & =& 686 \text{N}
\end{array} $$ 
</div>
</div>
</div>

<div data-type="glossary" markdown="1">

###Glossary
{: data-type="glossary-title"}

torque
: turning or twisting effectiveness of a force
{: #import-auto-id3100304}

perpendicular lever arm
: the shortest distance from the pivot point to the line along which $$
\mathbf{\text{F}} $$ lies
{: #import-auto-id3100306}

SI units of torque
: newton times meters, usually written as N·m
{: #import-auto-id3493270}

center of gravity
: the point where the total weight of the body is assumed to be concentrated 
{: #import-auto-id3493272}

</div>

