---
title: "Superstrings"
layout: page
---

<div class="abstract" markdown="1">
* Define Superstring theory.
* Explain the relationship between Superstring theory and the Big Bang.
</div>

Introduced earlier in [GUTS: The Unification of Forces](/m42680) **Superstring
theory** is an attempt to unify gravity with the other three forces and, thus,
must contain quantum gravity. The main tenet of Superstring theory is that
fundamental particles, including the graviton that carries the gravitational
force, act like one-dimensional vibrating strings. Since gravity affects the
time and space in which all else exists, Superstring theory is an attempt at a
Theory of Everything (TOE). Each independent quantum number is thought of as a
separate dimension in some super space (analogous to the fact that the familiar
dimensions of space are independent of one another) and is represented by a
different type of Superstring. As the universe evolved after the Big Bang and
forces became distinct (spontaneous symmetry breaking), some of the dimensions
of superspace are imagined to have curled up and become unnoticed.

Forces are expected to be unified only at extremely high energies and at
particle separations on the order of $$ 10^{-35} \text{m} $$ . This could mean
that Superstrings must have dimensions or wavelengths of this size or smaller.
Just as quantum gravity may imply that there are no time intervals shorter than
some finite value, it also implies that there may be no sizes smaller than some
tiny but finite value. That may be about $$ 10^{-35} \text{m} $$ . If so, and if
Superstring theory can explain all it strives to, then the structures of
Superstrings are at the lower limit of the smallest possible size and can have
no further substructure. This would be the ultimate answer to the question the
ancient Greeks considered. There is a finite lower limit to space.

Not only is Superstring theory in its infancy, it deals with dimensions about 17
orders of magnitude smaller than the $$ 10^{-18} \text{m} $$ details that we
have been able to observe directly. It is thus relatively unconstrained by
experiment, and there are a host of theoretical possibilities to choose from.
This has led theorists to make choices subjectively (as always) on what is the
most elegant theory, with less hope than usual that experiment will guide them.
It has also led to speculation of alternate universes, with their Big Bangs
creating each new universe with a random set of rules. These speculations may
not be tested even in principle, since an alternate universe is by definition
unattainable. It is something like exploring a self-consistent field of
mathematics, with its axioms and rules of logic that are not consistent with
nature. Such endeavors have often given insight to mathematicians and scientists
alike and occasionally have been directly related to the description of new
discoveries.

### Section Summary

* Superstring theory holds that fundamental particles are one-dimensional
  vibrations analogous to those on strings and is an attempt at a theory of
  quantum gravity.

### Problems &amp; Exercises

<div class="exercise" data-element-type="problems-exercises">
<div class="problem" markdown="1">
The characteristic length of entities in Superstring theory is approximately  $$ 10^{-35} \text{m} $$.

(a) Find the energy in GeV of a photon of this wavelength.

(b) Compare this with the average particle energy of $$ 10^{19} \text{GeV} $$
needed for unification of forces.

</div>
<div class="solution" data-element-type="problems-exercises" markdown="1">
(a)  $$1 \times 10^{20}  $$
(b) 10 times greater

</div>
</div>

<div class="glossary" markdown="1">
### Glossary
{: class="glossary-title"}

Superstring theory
: a theory to unify gravity with the other three forces in which the fundamental
particles are considered to act like one-dimensional vibrating strings 

</div>
