---
title: "Preface"
layout: page
--- 

Welcome to *College Physics*, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to
increase student access to high-quality learning materials, maintaining highest
standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

### About OpenStax

OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it’s our mission to
improve student access to education. Our first openly licensed college textbook
was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 20 books for
college and AP courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. Our adaptive
learning technology, designed to improve learning outcomes through personalized
educational paths, is being piloted in college courses throughout the country.
Through our partnerships with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with
other educational resource organizations, OpenStax is breaking down the most
common barriers to learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed.

### About OpenStax Resources

#### Customization

College Physics is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International (CC BY) license, which means that you can distribute, remix, and
build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to OpenStax and its
content contributors.

Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or
pick and choose the sections that are most relevant to the needs of your course.
Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students certain chapters and
sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a
direct link in your syllabus to the sections in the web view of your book.

Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their
OpenStax book. The custom version can be made available to students in low-cost
print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit your book page on
openstax.org for more information.

#### Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any
professional-grade textbook, errors sometimes occur. Since our books are web
based, we can make updates periodically when deemed pedagogically necessary. If
you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page
on openstax.org. Subject matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax
is committed to remaining transparent about all updates, so you will also find a
list of past errata changes on your book page on openstax.org.

#### Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org,
and in low-cost print and iBooks editions.

### About *College Physics*

*College Physics* meets standard scope and sequence requirements for a
two-semester introductory algebra-based physics course. The text is grounded in
real-world examples to help students grasp fundamental physics concepts. It
requires knowledge of algebra and some trigonometry, but not calculus. *College
Physics* includes learning objectives, concept questions, links to labs and
simulations, and ample practice opportunities for traditional physics
application problems.

#### Coverage and Scope

College Physics is organized such that topics are introduced conceptually with a
steady progression to precise definitions and analytical applications. The
analytical aspect (problem solving) is tied back to the conceptual before moving
on to another topic. Each introductory chapter, for example, opens with an
engaging photograph relevant to the subject of the chapter and interesting
applications that are easy for most students to visualize.

Chapter 1: Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 2: Kinematics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 3: Two-Dimensional Kinematics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 4: Dynamics: Force and Newton\'s Laws of Motion * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 5: Further Applications of Newton\'s Laws: Friction, Drag, and
Elasticity * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 6: Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 7: Work, Energy, and Energy Resources * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 8: Linear Momentum and Collisions * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 9: Statics and Torque * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 10: Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 11: Fluid Statics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 12: Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 13: Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 14: Heat and Heat Transfer Methods * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 15: Thermodynamics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 16: Oscillatory Motion and Waves * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 17: Physics of Hearing * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 18: Electric Charge and Electric Field * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 19: Electric Potential and Electric Field * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 20: Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm\'s Law * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 21: Circuits and DC Instruments * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 22: Magnetism * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 23: Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
* * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 24: Electromagnetic Waves * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 25: Geometric Optics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 26: Vision and Optical Instruments * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 27: Wave Optics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 28: Special Relativity * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 29: Introduction to Quantum Physics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 30: Atomic Physics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 31: Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 32: Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 33: Particle Physics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chapter 34: Frontiers of Physics * * *
{: class="newline"}

Appendix A: Atomic Masses * * *
{: class="newline"}

Appendix B: Selected Radioactive Isotopes * * *
{: class="newline"}

Appendix C: Useful Information * * *
{: class="newline"}

Appendix D: Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation

#### Concepts and Calculations

The ability to calculate does not guarantee conceptual understanding. In order
to unify conceptual, analytical, and calculation skills within the learning
process, we have integrated Strategies and Discussions throughout the text.

#### Modern Perspective

The chapters on modern physics are more complete than many other texts on the
market, with an entire chapter devoted to medical applications of nuclear
physics and another to particle physics. The final chapter of the text,
“Frontiers of Physics,” is devoted to the most exciting endeavors in physics. It
ends with a module titled “Some Questions We Know to Ask.”

#### Key Features

##### Modularity

This textbook is organized as a collection of modules that can be rearranged and
modified to suit the needs of a particular professor or class. That being said,
modules often contain references to content in other modules, as most topics in
physics cannot be discussed in isolation.

##### Learning Objectives

Every module begins with a set of learning objectives. These objectives are
designed to guide the instructor in deciding what content to include or assign,
and to guide the student with respect to what they can expect to learn. After
completing the module and end-of-module exercises, students should be able to
demonstrate mastery of the learning objectives.

##### Call-Outs

Key definitions, concepts, and equations are called out with a special design
treatment. Call-outs are designed to catch readers’ attention, to make it clear
that a specific term, concept, or equation is particularly important, and to
provide easy reference for a student reviewing content.

##### Key Terms

Key terms are in bold and are followed by a definition in context. Definitions
of key terms are also listed in the Glossary, which appears at the end of the
module.

##### Worked Examples

Worked examples have four distinct parts to promote both analytical and
conceptual skills. Worked examples are introduced in words, always using some
application that should be of interest. This is followed by a Strategy section
that emphasizes the concepts involved and how solving the problem relates to
those concepts. This is followed by the mathematical Solution and Discussion.

Many worked examples contain multiple-part problems to help the students learn
how to approach normal situations, in which problems tend to have multiple
parts. Finally, worked examples employ the techniques of the problem-solving
strategies so that students can see how those strategies succeed in practice as
well as in theory.

##### Problem-Solving Strategies

Problem-solving strategies are first presented in a special section and
subsequently appear at crucial points in the text where students can benefit
most from them. Problem-solving strategies have a logical structure that is
reinforced in the worked examples and supported in certain places by line
drawings that illustrate various steps.

##### Misconception Alerts

Students come to physics with preconceptions from everyday experiences and from
previous courses. Some of these preconceptions are misconceptions, and many are
very common among students and the general public. Some are inadvertently picked
up through misunderstandings of lectures and texts. The Misconception Alerts
feature is designed to point these out and correct them explicitly.

##### Take-Home Investigations

Take Home Investigations provide the opportunity for students to apply or
explore what they have learned with a hands-on activity.

##### Things Great and Small

In these special topic essays, macroscopic phenomena (such as air pressure) are
explained with submicroscopic phenomena (such as atoms bouncing off walls).
These essays support the modern perspective by describing aspects of modern
physics before they are formally treated in later chapters. Connections are also
made between apparently disparate phenomena.

##### Simulations

Where applicable, students are directed to the interactive PHeT physics
simulations developed by the University of Colorado. There they can further
explore the physics concepts they have learned about in the module.

##### Summary

Module summaries are thorough and functional and present all important
definitions and equations. Students are able to find the definitions of all
terms and symbols as well as their physical relationships. The structure of the
summary makes plain the fundamental principles of the module or collection and
serves as a useful study guide.

##### Glossary

At the end of every module or chapter is a Glossary containing definitions of
all of the key terms in the module or chapter.

##### End-of-Module Problems

At the end of every chapter is a set of Conceptual Questions and/or skills-based
Problems &amp; Exercises. Conceptual Questions challenge students’ ability to
explain what they have learned conceptually, independent of the mathematical
details. Problems &amp; Exercises challenge students to apply both concepts and
skills to solve mathematical physics problems. Online, every other problem
includes an answer that students can reveal immediately by clicking on a “Show
Solution” button.

In addition to traditional skills-based problems, there are three special types
of end-of-module problems: Integrated Concept Problems, Unreasonable Results
Problems, and Construct Your Own Problems. All of these problems are indicated
with a subtitle preceding the problem.

##### Integrated Concept Problems

In Integrated Concept Problems, students are asked to apply what they have
learned about two or more concepts to arrive at a solution to a problem. These
problems require a higher level of thinking because, before solving a problem,
students have to recognize the combination of strategies required to solve it.

##### Unreasonable Results

In Unreasonable Results Problems, students are challenged to not only apply
concepts and skills to solve a problem, but also to analyze the answer with
respect to how likely or realistic it really is. These problems contain a
premise that produces an unreasonable answer and are designed to further
emphasize that properly applied physics must describe nature accurately and is
not simply the process of solving equations.

##### Construct Your Own Problem

These problems require students to construct the details of a problem, justify
their starting assumptions, show specific steps in the problem’s solution, and
finally discuss the meaning of the result. These types of problems relate well
to both conceptual and analytical aspects of physics, emphasizing that physics
must describe nature. Often they involve an integration of topics from more than
one chapter. Unlike other problems, solutions are not provided since there is no
single correct answer. Instructors should feel free to direct students regarding
the level and scope of their considerations. Whether the problem is solved and
described correctly will depend on initial assumptions.

### Additional Resources

#### Student and Instructor Resources

We’ve compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including
Getting Started Guides, an instructor solution manual, and PowerPoint slides.
Instructor resources require a verified instructor account, which can be
requested on your openstax.org log-in. Take advantage of these resources to
supplement your OpenStax book.

#### Partner Resources

OpenStax Partners are our allies in the mission to make high-quality learning
materials affordable and accessible to students and instructors everywhere.
Their tools integrate seamlessly with our OpenStax titles at a low cost. To
access the partner resources for your text, visit your book page on
openstax.org.

### About the Authors

#### Senior Contributing Authors

Paul Peter Urone, Professor Emeritus at California State University, Sacramento
* * *
{: class="newline"}

Roger Hinrichs, State University of New York, College at Oswego

#### Contributing Authors

Kim Dirks, University of Auckland* * *
{: class="newline"}

Manjula Sharma, University of Sydney

#### Reviewers

Matthew Adams, Crafton Hills College, San Bernardino Community College District
* * *
{: class="newline"}

Erik Christensen, South Florida Community College* * *
{: class="newline"}

Douglas Ingram, Texas Christian University * * *
{: class="newline"}

Eric Kincanon, Gonzaga University * * *
{: class="newline"}

Lee H. LaRue, Paris Junior College * * *
{: class="newline"}

Chuck Pearson, Virginia Intermont College* * *
{: class="newline"}

Marc Sher, College of William and Mary * * *
{: class="newline"}

Ulrich Zurcher, Cleveland State University
